Are you there, Charlie? Yeah, I'm here, Bill. Okay, great. I guess now to get
back on track chronologically. Yeah, the signal's still good. Okay, the
Catalyst, and you've mentioned a little bit about that. Again, it's a patent
lawyer story, kind of your new style. And it reminded me a little bit of the
Rose in that it had this unfinished musical piece in it. But music must mean a
lot to you to write about it so much. Yeah, I love it. I cannot play an
instrument. But a great many of my stories, at least in recent years, have music
plays a part in it. In fact, sometimes the plot turns on it. I had a funny one
in Analog, HTEC. I don't know whether you read that or not. Yes, I've read it.
Well, you may recall there that the guy deliberately went to hell so that he
could sit on the burning shores and watch the blue flames in the burning
brimstone. Because all of that, all the forgotten and unfinished music of the
entire world had been sent there. And he particularly wanted to hear Beethoven's
10th Symphony, which Beethoven never got to write except in bits and pieces. And
also, the finished part of the unfinished symphony was there. And several other
things. So, of course, I had to work in a patent angle and a legal angle to make
it saleable. But that was the guts of it.
And then, the
Venetian court, one of the critical things turns on Tchaikovsky's Fourth
Symphony, the opening chords, the faith thing. And, well, there are other
things, but you kind of love music. Oh, I should mention another thing. The
Catalyst at one time was a general novel. It was really about my brother, Billy.
Really about me and my mother and life in Fort Worth and life in the Red Light
District and life in the police department.
And one of the stories there involved a peculiar whistle, which was derived from
Sheep May Safely Graze by Johann Sebastian Bach. But that long version never
sold. And I thought, well, I'm not going to let it die. I will convert it to a
science fiction book with all the proper trappings and things you need to call
it science fiction, which I did. But I couldn't put in Bach. Well, I'll put in
this thing about the opera and the unfinished, well, it was an unfinished opera,
What Do You Want? And the profit, and so on. So, music was there, too. That's
what I thought. The only biographical information I've ever seen on you was in
Damon Knight's orbit before, and it said something about working in a police
department and something about a red light district and all that. So that must
be, I guess that's the only thing that's known about you other than what we're
finding out right now. Well, yeah. My first job was in the red light district in
Fort Worth. I worked there for three years. Three very happy years. And I never
availed myself of the facilities of the young ladies up the street. But I knew
they were there, and I said good morning to them, and they said good morning to
me. And the corner house, the big house of the main madam, had a little sandwich
shop. They had the cleanest and best food in the area, so all the boys in the
warehouse went up there for their lunch. Including me. So, there it was. It was
a lot of fun.
I was in the police department. Similarly, I worked for them for a year in the
fingerprint bureau. And that was an education. Did you finish your undergraduate
degree at TCU by any chance? No. Here's what happened there, Bill. My first
couple of years there were at night. And I had a ministerial scholarship in the
Bright College of the Bible. And as I may have mentioned to you, we parted
company, at least at Bright College, and I did. But I went back anyhow on
another scholarship.
And I took some more work in the daytime. And I worked at the police department
at night. Then I moved to Washington. And I did get my B.S. in chemistry from
George Washington University. And that was in 1942. And in 1946, I got my L.L.B.
in law and passed the bar. And all of this was part-time work. And it took me a
while to get it. So I did not get a degree at TCU. But I met my wife there at
well. And I met her in high school in Fort Worth. And she and I went to TCU
together. We rode the same bus every once in a while. And it was understood that
when I came to Washington, that we would get married as soon as possible, which
we finally did. And that's part of history.
I'm glad I asked about that, although it got me off the track on the Catalyst.
I'll get back on. But that's fascinating. The thing I liked about the Catalyst,
one of the things, was that you showed the day-to-day operation of an R&D unit,
both from the research scientist's point of view and the lawyer's point of view.
Most science fiction books always look at the head of the department or the
brilliant young researcher that doesn't have these kinds of day-to-day problems,
not only technical problems but political problems as well. So you must have
felt right at home when you're writing that with your background. Yes, I saw it
all happen. I changed the names, of course, except for one. The hero was a man
that I knew very well, a brilliant man, a great chemist. His real name was
Johnstone Sennot Mackay. Of course, in the book, I call him Johnstone Sinclair
Serain. But he was a real man, and he was the inventor. And he got all the
things done to him that were mentioned there. And he did leave. But he made this
marvelous invention. Meanwhile, and it did get into interference. None of the
other characters were real at all. The bad guys, they were not the same ones
that did things to him.
Speaking of which, how did your peers in industry take your writing? Let's say
later on at this time, whenever these patent lawyer stories came out, did the
people at Grace read it and your friends and acquaintances read it? And how did
they react to it? Well, they didn't know what it meant. They read it all right,
Bill, but they didn't know just how to react. They would say, I read your story,
and then wait as though I was going to say something, but I wouldn't say
anything. I read your book. And the catalyst, I guess, of all of these excited
the most reaction. I had calls from all over the place, all over the country,
asking
about it. Am I in it? I'd say, no, you're not in it. And especially from
Connecticut and people who were on that program but had long since retired. And,
of course, Johnny Mackay bought dozens of copies and circulated them all over
the country. He's dead now. He's out of cancer of the jaw.
So there was a reaction, but nobody complained about it. One of my neighbors
here in the little development where I was asked me, if I was still working for
Grace after that, and I said, yeah, they know I'm going to retire next year, so
they just are going to wait for that, which I guess maybe they did. It worked
out okay. Okay. Next came Firebird, which was, again, I call it a throwback just
for lack of a better word, but it was back in your old style, although, as we
talked about, it uses the more modern cosmology. And, again, you kind of
concluded that the universe is sentient, and I guess that was the mystical part
of this. And you also pulled off the biggest rebirth in your career because you
had the whole universe, the whole Big Bang to worry about now. Yeah. Well, I'm
sure you recognize the basic story here. This is Tristan and Isolde. I don't
know whether you go in for Wagner or not. Yes. But it is Isolde and Tristan
drinking what she thinks is the poison drink, but it's the love of lecture
again, and they fall in love. And after that, just about everything parallels
the Tristan and Isolde story, as you would find it in Wagner's opera, including
Death at the End. And, like, well, I changed it a little bit. In the beginning,
when I first wrote that, David Hartwell, a pocketbook, I should mention, he is a
medieval scholar. This is what he got his Ph.D. in English in. And he was quite
familiar with the Tristan legend, a myth. And he found Welsh origins for it. And
he had me change the names to look like Welsh names. And he said, make him more
of a Renaissance knight. So I put in some chess, which is easy enough. Or
something that looked like a chess game. I worked it into the plot and it came
out okay. But it is they're never content unless they make their contribution.
That spawns another question. I keep saying I only have two more questions, but
it spawns another one. Chess has appeared quite notably, especially in the short
stories. I assume you're a fan of the game. Well, I loved to play it. At least
in other years I did. And I still do. I read a book of chess combinations nearly
every night. It puts me to sleep. And various brilliances of some of the past
masters. It's an exciting thing. I used to play a lot more than I do now. We
used to have a chess club back at Sinemid. And also one at Grace. But these
things have long gone. So I do love the game. And there are occasions when I can
work it into a story. And if I can find one, I will. Okay, then the Venetian
Court. The Venetian Court appeared as a short story and then, I guess, later as
a fix-up. This was the first, as a fix-up to a novel. This was the first time I
had noticed that you had done that, written a short story and then extended to
the novel. It was really sort of a novel. I would say about 40,000 words as it
appeared in Analog. And then I expanded it to 60,000. So certainly it was
expanded. It was changed a little bit, but basically it's the same thing. And it
is the first time I've done anything like that. It is based a novel on a prior
work.
Okay. Tell me what you're working on now, if you have any plans for publishing
in the near future. Well, I have some items circulating right now, and I'm not
working on anything right now. I'm going to take it easy for a few weeks. The
things that I have circulating, I have a novel, science fiction novel app, which
has been turned down at least once, and I don't know whether it will ever sell.
Well, this has to do with the impact of a religion founded on Edgar Allan Poe
and its impact on an alien invasion from another galaxy.
And that one, oh, it's called The Raven. It's, of course, based on Poe as The
Raven. But that one is, as you say, a fix-up. It's a big expansion of a short
story which I sold to Harlan Ellison to be published in Glass Dangerous Vision.
How long ago was that? This was 1970,
oh, let's see, 75 or 76. He hasn't published it yet. Yeah, so I noticed. But I
didn't want it to go to waste, so I expanded it to this thing, which may never
be published either. Then I have one, two, three, four short
stories out. One deals with computers. One deals with Robert E. Lee and a
visitor from the future. One deals with, let me think, just a little examination
of muscular physics and falling down a well check.
One, I just sent out Saturday, the day before yesterday.
Let me see, what is it about?
My memory is failing me, Bill. I know it as plain as anything. Oh, yeah. It has
to do with a system for disposing of nuclear waste into one of the planets, of
the solar system. And it's a little exciting. I had to work out the physics of
escaping from a moon of Jupiter. So we'll see how that one goes. Okay. I'm glad
to hear that you're still putting things out. Look forward to it. Let me ask you
this, then. How do you want to be remembered as a science fiction writer? What
do you want people to remember about your work?
My request there is, please forget me. Let me sink into oblivion. Let the waves
wash up over the sand, and everything disappear. Honest to God. Okay. Do you
ever wish that you could have done it full time, had the inherited money or
something so you didn't have to worry about making bacon? Did you enjoy your
other work enough that the writing as a pastime was satisfying? Yeah, I like my
other work. It was a lot of fun being a patent attorney, working with inventors
that really knew their stuff, and taking what they invented and getting it down
into English and filing it with a patent office, battling with a patent office
to get the patent. That was fun. And I don't think I would want to trade that
for a professional life of writing science fiction, with or without pay. Writing
science fiction is work, and the other just is not. Okay. That as far as my list
of questions, that's it. I can't tell you enough how much I enjoyed it and that
you consented to be interviewed. Well, I'm always glad to talk to anybody that's
interested in stuff I've written. Oh, I am. Let me ask you a favor, which please
feel free to turn down if you'd rather not do it. May I send you my books to be
autographed? I will send the postage and all that good stuff. Would that be any
problem? I would be happy to do that. Oh, I thank you. That will... May I give a
little indication of what you would like me to say? Okay. I do appreciate that.
That would mean very much to me. I have been a fan of yours for... Well, I'm
only 34, so I can't be that long. But ever since I found the Ring of Ritornel
in 1971 or so, then I found the Rose. And I've read the Rose probably
eight times. And I don't have time to read... You're overdoing it. Well, I still
get something out of it. And it just really means a lot to me. And I don't have
the luxury of reading anything more than once. I don't read anything else once.
But I read that about once every year just to get it again. I wish it would get
back in print. I've got a whole bunch of copies of it, but I don't lend them to
friends. Well, okay. It's very gratifying to see it meant something to somebody.
It very much did. Charlie, thanks again. It's been really great. And you take
care and keep on writing. I look forward to seeing what you put out. Okay, Bill.
And I'll get you my books pretty quick, then. I sure appreciate that. Okay. Bye
-bye now.